Access Control Definitions




                             1
Copyright Notice
◼   This set of transparencies, hereinafter referred to as slides, is protected by copyright laws and provisions of International Treaties.
    The title and copyright regarding the slides (including, but not limited to, each and every image, photography, animation, video, audio,
    music and text) are property of the authors specified on page 1.
◼   The slides may be reproduced and used freely by research institutes, schools and Universities for non-profit, institutional purposes.
    In such cases, no authorization is requested.
◼   Any total or partial use or reproduction (including, but not limited to, reproduction on magnetic media, computer networks, and
    printed reproduction) is forbidden, unless explicitly authorized by the authors by means of written license.
◼   Information included in these slides is deemed as accurate at the date of publication. Such information is supplied for merely
    educational purposes and may not be used in designing systems, products, networks, etc. In any case, these slides are subject to
    changes without any previous notice. The authors do not assume any responsibility for the contents of these slides (including, but
    not limited to, accuracy, completeness, enforceability, updated-ness of information hereinafter provided).
◼   In any case, accordance with information hereinafter included must not be declared.
◼   In any case, this copyright notice must never be removed and must be reported even in partial uses.
Access Control Definitions
◼   An important requirement of any information management system is to:
    ◼  protect data and resources against unauthorized disclosure (secrecy)
    ◼ unauthorized or improper modifications (integrity),

    ◼ ensuring their availability to legitimate users (no denials-of-service).




◼   Enforcing protection therefore requires that every access to a system and its
    resources be controlled and that all and only authorized accesses can take place.

◼   This process goes under the name of access control .


                                                                                 3
Access Control Definitions
◼ Access control is a major building block of network security,
  regulating access of legitimate users to resources of a system.
◼ Access control by itself cannot prevent the occurrence of cyber-
  attacks.
◼ However, effective protection schemes cannot abstract from the

  definition of how access to system resources shall take




                                                              4
 Access Control Definitions

NISTIR 7298 defines access control as:
“the process of granting or denying specific requests to:
(1) obtain and use information and related information processing

    services;
(2) enter specific physical facilities”




                                                                5
Access Control Definitions
RFC 4949 defines access control as:
“a process by which use of system resources is regulated according
to a security policy and is permitted only by authorized entities
(users, programs, processes, or other systems) according to that
policy”




                                                              6
Access Control Security Requirements
Access control in theory should allow you to specify:
◼ Who is authorized To

◼ what resources For

◼ how long On

◼ which days

◼ With what modality

◼ By performing which operation




                                                        7
Access Control Security Requirements (SP 800-171)

Table 4.1, from NIST SP 800-171 (Protecting Controlled
Unclassified Information in Nonfederal Information Systems
and Organizations , August 2016), provides a useful list of
security requirements for access control services.
Access Control Security Requirements (SP 800-171)


Basic Security Requirements
1. Limit information system access to authorized users, processes
   acting on behalf of authorized users, or devices (including other
   information systems).
2. Limit information system access to the types of transactions and

   functions that authorized users are permitted to execute.
 Access Control Security Requirements (SP 800-171)


Derived Security Requirements
3. Control the flow of Controlled Unclassified Information in

   accordance with approved authorizations.
4. Separate the duties of individuals to reduce the risk of
   malevolent activity without collusion.
5. Employ the principle of least privilege, including for specific

   security functions and privileged accounts.
Access Control Security Requirements (SP 800-171)


Derived Security Requirements
5. Prevent non-privileged users from executing privileged

   functions and audit the execution of such functions.
6. Limit unsuccessful logon attempts.

7. Provide privacy and security notices consistent with applicable
   Controlled Unclassified Information rules.
Access Control Security Requirements (SP 800-171)


Derived Security Requirements
10. Use session lock with pattern-hiding displays to prevent access

    and viewing of data after period of inactivity.
11. Terminate (automatically) a user session after a defined
    condition.
12. Monitor and control remote access sessions.

13. Employ cryptographic mechanisms to protect the

    confidentiality of remote access sessions.
Access Control Security Requirements (SP 800-171)


Derived Security Requirements
14. Route remote access via managed access control points.

15. Authorize remote execution of privileged commands and

    remote access to security-relevant information.
16. Authorize wireless access prior to allowing such connections.

17. Protect wireless access using authentication and encryption.

18. Control connection of mobile devices.
Access Control Security Requirements (SP 800-171)


Derived Security Requirements
19. Encrypt Controlled Unclassified Information on mobile devices.

20. Verify and control/limit connections to and use of external

    information systems.
21. Limit use of organizational portable storage devices on external
    information systems.
22. Control Controlled Unclassified Information posted or
    processed on publicly accessible information systems.
Access Control Principles
◼ In a broad sense, all of computer security is concerned with access
  control
◼ RFC 4949 defines computer security as:



“measures that implement and assure security
services in a computer system, particularly those
that assure access control service”
Relationship Among Access Control and Other Security Functions


                                          1) Authentication:
                                          Verification that the
                                          credentials of a user or
                                          other system entity are
                                          valid.
Relationship Among Access Control and Other Security Functions

                                          2) Authorization:
                                          The granting of a right
                                          or permission to a
                                          system entity to
                                          access a system
                                          resource. This
                                          function determines
                                          who is trusted for a
                                          given purpose.
Relationship Among Access Control and Other Security Functions
                                       3 Audit:
                                       An independent review and
                                       examination of system records
                                       and activities in order to verify
                                       for adequacy of system
                                       controls, to ensure compliance
                                       with established policy and
                                       operational procedures, to
                                       detect breaches in security,
                                       and to recommend any
                                       indicated changes in control,
                                       policy and procedures.
Relationship Among Access Control and Other Security Functions
                                  ▪ The security administrator
                                    creates and maintains the
                                    authorization database.
                                  ▪ The user accesses the systems
                                    resources after being authenticated
                                    by the authentication function.
                                  ▪ The access is controlled via access
                                    control function. A data exchange
                                    occurs between access control
                                    function and authorization database.
                                  ▪ Audit consists of an independent

                                    review and examination of system
                                    records and activities.     19
Authentication




                 20
Internal and External Audit
◼   The auditing processes of information technology (IT)
    enterprises are divided into two types as:
    ◼ internal audit
    ◼ external audit.
Internal Audit
◼   Internal auditing is performed by auditors (employees) internally in the
    organization.

◼   The purposes of the internal auditors are to identify the risks whenever
    they arise related to the performance, security and compliance issues.

◼   They also keep a watch on what are being done to mitigate those problems
    aiming to help the organization perform better.
External Audit
◼   External audit is carried out by professional auditors external to the
    organization.
◼   They are independent body, often being certified public accountants (CPAs),
    and perform an independent auditing of the organization.
◼   The shareholders and clients of any organization pay more attention and
    importance to this external audit report regarding performance, security
    and compliance of the system.
Differences between internal and external audit
An access control mechanism




                              25
An access control mechanism
◼   An access control mechanism mediates
    between a user (or a process executing on
    behalf of a user) and system resources, such as
    applications, operating systems, firewalls,
    routers, files, and databases.

◼   The system must first authenticate an entity
    seeking access. Typically, the authentication
    function determines whether the user is
    permitted to access the system at all.
                                                      26
An access control mechanism
◼ Then the access control function determines if
  the specific requested access by this user is
  permitted.
◼ A security administrator maintains an
  authorization database that specifies what type
  of access to which resources is allowed for this
  user.
◼ The access control function consults this

  database to determine whether to grant access
                                                     27
An access control mechanism
◼ In the simple model show in Figure, the access
  control function is shown as a single logical
  module.
◼ In practice, a number of components may
  cooperatively share the access control function.




                                                     28
An access control mechanism
◼ All operating systems have at least a
  rudimentary, and in many cases a quite robust,
  access control component.
◼ Add-on security packages can supplement
  the native access control capabilities of the OS.
◼ Particular applications or utilities, such as a
  database management system, also incorporate
  access control functions.


                                                      29
An access control mechanism
◼   External devices, such as firewalls, can also
    provide access control services.




                                                    30
An access control mechanism
In brief, the process is usually carried out with a multi-phase
approach based on the following concepts:
◼ Security mechanism

◼ Security policy

◼ Security model




                                                                  31
Security mechanism
◼   It defines the low level (software and hardware) functions that
    implement the controls imposed by the policy and formally stated
    in the model

◼   In particular, the separation between policies and mechanisms
    introduces an independence between protection requirements to
    be enforced on the one side, and mechanisms enforcing them on
    the other.


                                                               32
Separation between policies and mechanisms
It is then possible to:
i)   discuss protection requirements independently of their implementation,
ii)  compare different access control policies as well as different mechanisms
     that enforce the same policy
iii) design mechanisms able to enforce multiple policies



◼   This latter aspect is particularly important: if a mechanism is tied to a
    specific policy, a change in the policy would require changing the whole
    access control system


                                                                           33
Access Control Policies
◼   It defines the (high-level) rules according to which access control
    must be regulated

◼   An access control policy, which can be embodied in an
    authorization database,

◼   A policy dictates what types of access are permitted, under what
    circumstances, and by whom.

                                                                  34
Access Control Policy Model
◼   It provides a formal representation of the access control security
    policy and its working.

◼   The formalization allows the proof of properties on the security
    provided by the access control system being designed.




                                                                 35
Access Control Policies
◼   Access control policies regulate the access of users to the
    resources of a networked system by defining “who is allowed to
    do what on what”.




                                                            36
Subjects, Objects, and Access Rights
A first step in the development of an access control system based on
DAC is:
◼ the identification of the objects to be protected,

◼ the subjects that execute activities and request access to objects,

◼ the actions that can be executed on the objects, and that must be
  controlled




                                                              37
Subjects, Objects, and Action
◼   Subjects, objects, and actions may be different in different systems
    or application contexts

◼   For instance, in the protection of operating systems, objects are
    typically files, directories, or programs; in database systems,
    objects can be relations, views, stored procedures, and so on.




                                                                  38
Subjects
◼ A subject is an entity capable of accessing objects.
◼ Generally, the concept of subject equates with that of process. Any user or
  application actually gains access to an object by means of a process that
  represents that user or application.

◼   A subject is typically held accountable for the actions they have initiated, and an
    audit trail may be used to record the association of a subject with security relevant
    actions performed on an object by the subject.



                                                                                 39
Subjects
◼ Subject can create additional subjects (e.g., children processes) in
  order to accomplish its task.
◼ The creator subject acquires control privileges on the created
  processes (e.g., to be able to suspend or terminate its children).




                                                                 40
Object
◼ An object is a resource to which access is controlled.
◼ In general, an object is an entity used to contain and/or receive

  information.
    ◼ Examples include records, blocks, pages, segments, files, portions of files,
      directories, directory trees, mailboxes, messages, and programs.
    ◼ Some access control systems also encompass, bits, bytes, words,

      processors, communication ports, clocks, and network nodes.




                                                                            41
Object

◼   The number and types of objects to be protected by an access
    control system depends on the environment in which access
    control operates and the desired tradeoff between security on the
    one hand and complexity, processing burden, and ease of use on
    the other hand.




                                                               42
Action (or Operation)
◼   It represents what a subject can do in terms of Action or
    Operation into an object

◼   In most cases, an action is an access right that describes how a
    subject may access an object. Access rights typically would include:
    Read, Write, Execute




                                                                 43
Access Rights
◼   Read: User may view information in a system resource (e.g., a file,
    selected records in a file, selected fields within a record, or some
    combination). Read access includes the ability to copy or print.

◼   Write: User may add, modify, or delete data in system resource
    (e.g., files, records, programs). Write access includes read access.

◼   Execute: User may execute specified programs.

                                                                   44
Access Rights
◼   Delete: User may delete certain system resources, such as files or
    records.

◼   Create: User may create new files, records, or fields.

◼   Search: User may list the files in a directory or otherwise search
    the directory.


                                                                45
 Access Control Policies Model
Access control policy model are generally grouped into:
◼ Discretionary access control (D A C)

   ◼ Controls access based on the identity of the requestor and on access rules

     (authorizations) stating what requestors are (or are not) allowed to do
◼ Mandatory access control (M A C)

   ◼ Controls access based on comparing security labels with security clearances

◼ Role-based access control (R B A C)

   ◼ Controls access based on the roles that users have within the system and on rules

     stating what accesses are allowed to users in given roles
◼ Attribute-based access control (A B A C)

   ◼ Controls access based on attributes of the user, the resource to be accessed, and

     current environmental conditions
Access Control Policies Model
◼   These four policies are not mutually exclusive. An access control
    mechanism may employ two or even all three of these policies to
    cover different classes of system resources.

◼   Policies (especially Discretionary and role-based ) are usually
    coupled with (or include) an administrative policy that defines
    who can specify authorizations/rules governing access control.



                                                                47
Discretionary Access Control (DAC)
◼   Discretionary policies enforce access control on the basis of the
    identity of the requestors and explicit access rules that establish
    who can, or cannot, execute which actions on which resources.

◼   They are called discretionary as users can be given the ability of
    passing on their privileges to other users, where granting and
    revocation of privileges is regulated by an administrative policy.



                                                                   48
Discretionary Access Control (DAC)
◼   Often provided using an access matrix
    ◼ One dimension consists of identified subjects that may attempt data access to the
      resources
    ◼ The other dimension lists the objects that may be accessed

◼ Each entry in the matrix indicates the access rights of a particular subject for
  a particular object
◼ This model is called access matrix since the authorization state, meaning the
  authorizations holding at a given time in the system, is represented as a
  matrix
◼ The matrix therefore gives an abstract representation of protection
  systems.
Discretionary Access Control (DAC)




                                     50
Discretionary Access Control (DAC)




                                     51
Example of Access Control Structures
Implementation of the Access Matrix
◼ Although the matrix represents a good conceptualization of
  authorizations, it is not appropriate for implementation.
◼ In a general system, the access matrix will be usually enormous in
  size and sparse (most of its cells are likely to be empty).

◼   Storing the matrix as a two-dimensional array is therefore a waste
    of memory space.



                                                                53
Implementation of the Access Matrix
There are three approaches to implementing the access
matrix in a practical way:
◼ Authorization Table
◼ Access Control List (ACL)

◼ Capability




                                                        54
Authorization Table
      Subject   Access   Object    Subject   Access   Object
                Mode                         Mode
        A       Own      File 1      C       Read     File 1
        A        Read     File 1      C      Write    File 1
        A        Write    File 1      C      Read     File 2
        A       Own       File 3      C      Own      File 4
        A        Read     File 3      C      Read      File 4
        A        Write    File 3      C      Write     File 4

        B       Read     File 1
         B      Own      File 2
         B      Read     File 2
         B       Write   File 2
         B       Write   File 3
         B      Read     File 4
Access Control List (ACL) e Capability
Example of an Extended Access Control Matrix
An Organization of the Access Control Function
Mandatory access control (MAC)
◼   It controls access by comparing security labels (which indicate how
    sensitive or critical system resources are) with security
    permissions (which indicate that system entities are eligible to
    access certain resources).

◼   This policy is called mandatory because an entity that has
    permission to access a resource cannot, by its own volition, allow
    another entity to access that resource.


                                                                 59
Mandatory access control (MAC)




                                 60
Role-Based Access Control Models
◼   Role-based access control (RBAC) is an alternative to traditional
    discretionary (DAC) and mandatory access control (MAC) policies that is
    attracting increasing attention, particularly for commercial applications.

◼   The main motivation behind RBAC is the necessity to specify and enforce
    enterprise-specific security policies in a way that maps naturally to an
    organization’s structure. In fact, in a large number of business activities a
    user’s identity is relevant only from the point of view of accountability.




                                                                            61
Role-Based Access Control Models
◼ For access control purposes it is much more important to know what a
  user’s organizational responsibilities are, rather than who the user is.
◼ The conventional discretionary access controls, in which individual user
  ownership of data plays such an important part, are not a good fit.
◼ Neither are the full mandatory access controls, in which users have security

  clearances and objects have security classifications.
◼ Role-based access control tries to fill in this gap by merging the flexibility of
  explicit authorizations with additionally imposed organizational constraints.



                                                                            62
Role-Based Access Control Models
◼ Traditional DAC systems define the access rights of individual users and
  groups of users.
◼ In contrast, RBAC is based on the roles that users assume in a system
  rather than the user’s identity.
◼ Typically, RBAC models define a role as a job function within an

  organization.
◼ RBAC systems assign access rights to roles instead of individual users. In
  turn, users are assigned to different roles, either statically or dynamically,
  according to their responsibilities.


                                                                            63
Users, Roles, and Resources
Role-Based Access Control Models
◼ The relationship of users to roles is many to many, as is the relationship of
  roles to resources, or system objects
◼ The set of users changes, in some environments frequently, and the
  assignment of a user to one or more roles may also be dynamic.
◼ The set of roles in the system in most environments is relatively static, with

  only occasional additions or deletions.
◼ Each role will have specific access rights to one or more resources. The set
  of resources and the specific access rights associated with a particular role
  are also likely to change infrequently.


                                                                         65
Access Control Matrix Representation of RBAC
Example of Role Hierarchy
Role Hierarchy
◼ Role hierarchies provide a means of reflecting the hierarchical structure of
  roles in an organization.
◼ Typically, job functions with greater responsibility have greater authority to
  access resources.
◼ A subordinate job function may have a subset of the access rights of

  the superior job function.
◼ Role hierarchies make use of the concept of inheritance to enable one
  role to implicitly include access rights associated with a subordinate role.



                                                                         68
Least Privilege
◼   The principle of least privilege maintains that an individual, process, or other
    type of entity should be given the minimum privileges and resources for the
    minimum period of time required to complete a task.

◼    This approach reduces the opportunity for unauthorized access to sensitive
    information.
Separation of privilege
◼   The principle of separation of privilege suggests to break a single privilege
    among multiple independent subjects (component or user) so that more
    than one authorizations are required to perform an action.

◼   This protects the system from someone’s evil intention.




                                                               70
Constraints - RBAC
Provide a means of adapting R B A C to the specifics of administrative and security policies of
an organization. A defined relationship among roles or a condition related to roles
◼   Mutually exclusive roles
    ◼ A user can only be assigned to one role in the set (either during a session or
      statically)
    ◼ Any permission (access right) can be granted to only one role in the set

◼   Cardinality
    ◼   Setting a maximum number with respect to roles
◼   Prerequisite roles
         ◼   Dictates that a user can only be assigned to a particular role if it is already assigned
             to some other specified role
Attribute-Based Access Control (ABAC)

◼   A relatively recent development in access control technology is
    the attribute-based access control (ABAC) model.

◼   An ABAC model can define authorizations that express
    conditions on properties of both the resource and the subject

◼   The strength of the ABAC approach is its flexibility and
    expressive power
ABAC Model




             73
ABAC Model
◼ It is clear from the logical architecture that there are four independent sources of
  information used for the access control decision.
◼ The system designer can decide which attributes are important for access control with

  respect to subjects, objects, and environmental conditions.
◼ The system designer or other authority can then define access control policies, in the

  form of rules, for any desired combination of attributes of subject, object, and
  environmental conditions.




                                                                                  74
ABAC Model
◼ It should be evident that this approach is very powerful and
  flexible.
◼ However, the cost, both in terms of the complexity of the design
  and implementation and in terms of the performance impact, is
  likely to exceed that of other access control approaches.
◼ This is a tradeoff that the system authority must make.



◼   ABAC are capable of enforcing D A C, R B A C, and M A C
    concepts
                                                             75
ABAC Model: Attributes
◼   Attributes are characteristics that define specific aspects of the subject,
    object, environment conditions, and/or requested operations that are
    predefined and preassigned by an authority.

Three types of attributes in the ABAC model:
◼ Subject attributes

◼ Object attributes

◼ Environment attributes
ABAC Model: Subject attributes
◼ A subject is an active entity (e.g., a user, an application, a process, or
  a device) that causes information to flow among objects or changes
  the system state.
◼ Each subject has associated attributes that define the identity and

  characteristics of the subject.
◼ Such attributes may include the subject’s identifier, name,

  organization, job title, and so on.
◼ A subject’s role can also be viewed as an attribute.
ABAC Model: Object attributes
◼ An object, also referred to as a resource , is a passive (in the context of the
  given request) information system-related entity (e.g., devices, files, records,
  tables, processes, programs, networks, domains) containing or receiving
  information.
◼ As with subjects, objects have attributes that can be leveraged to make

  access control decisions.
   ◼ A Microsoft Word document, for example, may have attributes such as

     title, subject, date, and author.
◼ Object attributes can often be extracted from the metadata of the object.

    ◼   In particular, a variety of Web service metadata attributes may be relevant for access
        control purposes, such as ownership, service taxonomy, or even Quality of Service
        (QoS) attributes.
ABAC Model: Environment attributes
◼ These attributes have so far been largely ignored in most access
  control policies.
◼ They describe the operational, technical, and even situational
  environment or context in which the information access occurs.
    ◼   For example, attributes, such as current date and time, the current
        virus/hacker activities, and the network’s security level (e.g., Internet vs.
        intranet), are not associated with a particular subject nor a resource, but
        may nonetheless be relevant in applying an access control policy.
Attribute-Based Access Control (ABAC)

◼ Main obstacle to its adoption in real systems has been concern
  about the performance impact of evaluating predicates on both
  resource and user properties for each access
◼ Web services have been pioneering technologies through the
  introduction of the eXtensible Access Control Markup Language
  (XAMCL)
◼ There is considerable interest in applying the model to cloud

  services
