Security by design




                     1
How I am
RTDB at Netgroup (https://netgroup.polito.it/) -> Associate Prof. from I November
Contact:
◼ Email: Fulvio.valenza [at] polito [dot] it (for official request)

◼ Telegram: @fulvio.valenza (for simple o urgent topics)

Courses:
◼ Networks and cloud security

    ◼   1st Year, 1st +2nd Semester
◼   Data protection, privacy and anonymity
    ◼   2nd Year, 1nd Semester (characterizing course for Cyber Designer tracks)
◼   Threat Intelligence and Incident Management,
    ◼   2nd Year, 2nd Semester (characterizing course for Cyber Analyst tracks)
My role in CdLM:
◼ Deputy Advisor, Applay, Evaluation of Study Plans, Tutor
                                                                                    2
Something extra




                  3
Main Security Principles
◼ Security by design
◼ Zero Trust

◼ Open Design DesignPrinciple




                                4
Security by design
◼   Secure by design, in software engineering, means that the software has been
    designed from the foundation to be secure.
    ◼   the best security tactics and patterns are selected and enforced by the architecture
        design, and then used as guiding principles for developers


◼   In cloud Computing one key aspect is the Protection of Sensitive (i.e.,
    business critical) Data
Security by design
    Least Privilege

    Separation of Duties

    Separation of privilege

    Defense in Depth

    Fail Secure

    Complete Mediation

    Psychological Acceptability

    Weakest Link
Least Privilege
◼   The principle of least privilege maintains that an individual, process, or other
    type of entity should be given the minimum privileges and resources for the
    minimum period of time required to complete a task.

◼    This approach reduces the opportunity for unauthorized access to sensitive
    information.
    Separation of Duties
◼ Separation of duties requires that completion of a specificed sensitive
  activity or access to sensitive objects is dependent on the satisfaction of a
  plurality of conditions.
◼ For example, an authorization would require signatures of more than one

  individual, or the arming of a weapons system would require two individuals
  with different keys.

◼   Separation of duties forces collusion among entities in order to compromise
    the system.



                                                                          8
Separation of Duties (example)




                                 9
Separation of Duties (example)




                                 10
Separation of privilege
◼   The principle of separation of privilege suggests to break a single privilege
    among multiple independent subjects (component or user) so that more
    than one authorizations are required to perform an action.

◼   This protects the system from someone’s evil intention.




                                                               11
Defense in Depth
◼   Defense in depth is the application of multiple layers of protection wherein a subsequent
    layer will provide protection if a previous layer is breached.
Fail Secure V.S Fail Safe

        Fail Safe




                            Fail Secure
Fail Secure
◼   Fail secure means that if a cloud system fails it should fail to a state in which the security
    of the system and its data are not compromised.

◼   One implementation of this philosophy would be to make a system default to a state in
    which a user or process is denied access to the system.
◼    A complementary rule would be to ensure that when the system recovers, it should
    recover to a secure state and not permit unauthorized access to sensitive information.
Fail Secure
◼   This approach is based on using permissions instead of exclusions.

◼   In the situation where system recovery is not done automatically, the failed system
    should permit access only by the system administrator and not by other users, until
    security controls are reestablished.
Complete Mediation
◼   In complete meditation, every request by a subject to access an object in a
    computer system must undergo a valid and effective authorization
    procedure

◼   This mediation must not be suspended or become capable of being
    bypassed, even when the information system is being initialized, undergoing
    shutdown, being restarted, or is in maintenance mode.
Complete Mediation
Complete mediation entails the following:
1. Identification of the entity making the access request

2. Verification that the request has not changed since its initiation

3. Application of the appropriate authorization procedures

4. Reexamination of previously authorized requests by the same
   entity
Least Common Mechanism
◼   This principle states that a minimum number of protection mechanisms should be
    common to multiple users, as shared access paths can be sources of unauthorized
    information exchange.

◼   Shared access paths that provide unintentional data transfers are known as covert
    channels.

◼   Thus, the least common mechanism promotes the least possible sharing of common
    security mechanisms.
Psychological Acceptability
◼   Psychological acceptability refers to the ease of use and intuitiveness of the
    user interface that controls and interacts with the cloud access control
    mechanisms.

◼    Users must be able to understand the user interface and use it without
    having to interpret complex instructions.
Weakest Link
◼ Like the old saying ‘a chain is only as strong as its weakest link’, the security
  of any system is also as good as its weakest module.
◼ Attackers always try to identify the most fragile part of the whole
  protection system in order to start their activities to dilapidate the system.
◼ Thus, the security system should be revised again and again to detect and

  resolve the weakest parts in the security chain.




                                                                   Cloud Computer Security
                                                              20
Zero Trust
Zero Trust
◼   Distributed security
    ◼ Firewall

    ◼ VPN

    ◼ Password
Zero Trust
◼   https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=PitpSDmUaXE




                                                  23
Open Design DesignPrinciple




                              24
