                 Cybersecurity and National Defence (Grandi Sfide - Digital)
                                                                 A.Y. 2025 - 2026


                                                     Enrico Bravi
                                           enrico.bravi@polito.it


Module B – Social Engineering
and Digital Identity
B1 – Human Factor


                                  TORSEC
                                  Computer and Network Security Group
   Acknowledgments
    This lecture deck adapts and reorganizes selected teaching
    material originally developed by Nicolò Maunero (CINI /
    Cybersecurity National Lab). Portions of the content are reused
    under the Creative Commons BY-NC license (see license slide). All
    modifications, additions, re-organization, and any errors are the
    responsibility of the course instructor.​




Cybersecurity and National Defence (Grandi Sfide - Digital)
                                                                    2
A.Y. 2025 - 2026
  License & Disclaimer
              License Information                                            Disclaimer
        This presentation is licensed under the               ➢ We disclaim any warranties or
         Creative Commons BY-NC License                         representations as to the accuracy or
                                                                completeness of this material.
                                                              ➢ Materials are provided “as is” without
                                                                warranty of any kind, either express or
                                                                implied, including without limitation,
                                                                warranties of merchantability, fitness for a
                                                                particular purpose, and non-infringement.
                                                              ➢ Under no circumstances shall we be liable
                                                                for any loss, damage, liability or expense
          To view a copy of the license, visit:
                                                                incurred or suffered which is claimed to have
   http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc/3.0/legalcode
                                                                resulted from use of this material.
                                                              ➢ This material is used and adapted within the
                                                                course “Cybersecurity and National
                                                                Defense”.

Cybersecurity and National Defence (Grandi Sfide - Digital)
                                                                                                           3
A.Y. 2025 - 2026
   Learning Goals
    ➢ introducing the concept of Social Engineering
    ➢ analyzing the main motivations that make it possible




Cybersecurity and National Defence (Grandi Sfide - Digital)
                                                              4
A.Y. 2025 - 2026
   Vulnerabilities Classification
                                                        Vulnerabilities


                                     Nature                                        Domain



                       Unintentional          Intentional     Technology         Organization   Human


                            Bugs                Backdoors       Specifications

                            Flaws
                                                                Hardware


                                                                Software

                                                                Communications
Cybersecurity and National Defence (Grandi Sfide - Digital)
                                                                                                        5
A.Y. 2025 - 2026
   Human Factor
    ➢ humans remain the weakest link in cybersecurity
    ➢ they can be manipulated to perform malicious operations
      (against themselves!)
         ➢ downloading software

         ➢ visiting websites

         ➢ sending money to criminals

         ➢ …




Cybersecurity and National Defence (Grandi Sfide - Digital)
                                                                6
A.Y. 2025 - 2026
    “No matter how strong your firewalls,
    intrusion detection systems, encryption,
    antivirus, you are still the weakest link in
    cybersecurity!
    People are more vulnerable than computers”

    [Kevin D. Mitnick & William L. Simon – The
    Art of Deception]




Cybersecurity and National Defence (Grandi Sfide - Digital)
                                                              7
A.Y. 2025 - 2026
   Motivation
    ➢ lack of awareness and culture from ALL the involved
      people/stakeholders​
         ➢ people not involved in technical operations often believe

            that cybersecurity involves only few persons playing with
            laptops in a basement
    ➢ misperception of risks
         ➢ usually attackers exploit information considered

            meaningless by users
    ➢ this opens the doors to Social Engineering
         ➢ it doesn’t require to be a hacker or a programmer, but most

            of the time it requires to be able to send an email

Cybersecurity and National Defence (Grandi Sfide - Digital)
                                                                     8
A.Y. 2025 - 2026
   Social Engineering (I)
    ➢    the art and science of making people do what you want them to
         do


                            [Harl - People Hacking: The Psychology of Social Engineering]




Cybersecurity and National Defence (Grandi Sfide - Digital)
                                                                                            9
A.Y. 2025 - 2026
   Social Engineering (II)
    ➢    combination of sociological, psychological, and information-
         gathering techniques used to manipulate people with the ultimate
         goal of:
           ➢ persuading them to release sensitive information​ (e.g.,

              passwords, credit cards details)
           ➢ performing actions that do not comply with normal security

              measures​ (e.g., visiting malicious websites, open
              attachments in suspicious emails)
           ➢ getting them to act in a way that allows unauthorized

              access or use of systems, networks, data, information (e.g.,
              opening physical doors, borrowing sensitive devices)

Cybersecurity and National Defence (Grandi Sfide - Digital)
                                                                        10
A.Y. 2025 - 2026
   Social Engineering (III)
    ➢    "The use of one's influence and
         persuasion skills to deceive or
         manipulate others into believing that the
         social engineer is what she/he is not."


    [Kevin D. Mitnick & William L. Simon – The Art of
    Deception]




Cybersecurity and National Defence (Grandi Sfide - Digital)
                                                              11
A.Y. 2025 - 2026
   Social Engineering – How is it possible?




Cybersecurity and National Defence (Grandi Sfide - Digital)
                                                              12
A.Y. 2025 - 2026
   Human Factor Analysis
    ➢    humans:
           ➢ are “complex” systems, and criminals can manipulate

             victims’ emotions and instincts in ways proven to drive
             people to perform actions that are not in their best interests
           ➢ have vulnerabilities mostly based on:

             ➢ behavioral traits

             ➢ good faith exercised by individuals in social relationships

             ➢ cognitive bias




Cybersecurity and National Defence (Grandi Sfide - Digital)
                                                                          13
A.Y. 2025 - 2026
   Dual Process Theory (I)
    ➢ Peter Wason and Jonathan St B. T. Evans suggested dual
      process theory in 1974
    ➢ assumes that the decision-making process is the result of the
      interaction between two distinct systems:
         ➢ system 1: automatic and unconscious cognitive activity​

            (fast, instinctive, and emotional)
         ➢ system 2: conscious and rational cognitive activity​ (slow,

            logical, and deliberate)




Cybersecurity and National Defence (Grandi Sfide - Digital)
                                                                         14
A.Y. 2025 - 2026
   Dual Process Theory (II)
         System 1 (Intuitive)                                 System 2 (Analytical)
         ➢ operates automatically                             ➢ is activated when faced with
         ➢ is fast                                              challenging mental activities
         ➢ does not require cognitive
                                                              ➢ is slow
           effort
         ➢ does not require voluntary                         ➢ requires greater cognitive effort
           control
                                                              ➢ requires voluntary control
         ➢ is always working and
           active                                             ➢ requires maximum

                                                                concentration
                                                              ➢ the ability to keep it active is
                                                                easily exhausted
Cybersecurity and National Defence (Grandi Sfide - Digital)
                                                                                               15
A.Y. 2025 - 2026
   System 1 – Example
    ➢ detecting emotion in a face
    ➢ when you look at a photo of someone yelling, you don’t
      “calculate” their mood, but you instantly know they are angry
    ➢ this process is characterized by:
         ➢ awareness: you didn’t “try” to see the anger; it just

            happened
         ➢ efficiency: it took zero mental effort




Cybersecurity and National Defence (Grandi Sfide - Digital)
                                                                      16
A.Y. 2025 - 2026
   System 2 – Example
    ➢ solving 17*24
    ➢ the answer doesn't just “pop” into your head, but you have to
      consciously choose to start the problem, hold the numbers in
      your working memory, and follow a sequence of rules
    ➢ this process is characterized by:
         ➢ intentionality: you must consciously “start up” this process

         ➢ capacity: if someone starts talking to you while you’re

            doing the math, you’ll likely lose your place because
            System 2 has limited resources
         ➢ rule-based: you are following a logical, step-by-step

            analytical path

Cybersecurity and National Defence (Grandi Sfide - Digital)
                                                                      17
A.Y. 2025 - 2026
   Cognitive Biases
    ➢    cognitive biases interfere with the functioning of intuitive thinking,
         altering the perception of many events




Cybersecurity and National Defence (Grandi Sfide - Digital)
                                                                              18
A.Y. 2025 - 2026
   Cognitive Bias as a Vulnerability
    ➢    the social engineer, via various techniques and strategies,
         exploits the onset of cognitive bias in the victim and uses these
         weaknesses to achieve his/her goals




Cybersecurity and National Defence (Grandi Sfide - Digital)
                                                                             19
A.Y. 2025 - 2026
 The “Urgent Wire Transfer” Phishing Email
    ➢ an employee in the finance department receives an email that
      appears to be from the company’s CEO
    ➢ the email says:



                   “I’m in a board meeting and can’t talk, but we need to
                   secure this vendor contract immediately or we’ll lose the
                   deal. Please wire $50,000 to the attached account details
                   right now. I need a confirmation in 10 minutes.”




Cybersecurity and National Defence (Grandi Sfide - Digital)
                                                                               20
A.Y. 2025 - 2026
   How it Exploits Cognitive Biases (I)
    ➢    the attacker isn't hacking the computer; they are hacking the
         cognitive biases that govern System 1:
            ➢ authority: humans have an instinctive tendency to obey

               figures of authority, and when System 1 sees a “message
               from the CEO”, it triggers a compliance response before
               System 2 can ask, “Is this email address actually correct?”




Cybersecurity and National Defence (Grandi Sfide - Digital)
                                                                             21
A.Y. 2025 - 2026
   How it Exploits Cognitive Biases (II)
              ➢ urgency: by adding a 10 minutes deadline, the attacker
                creates a high-pressure environment, where high stress
                and urgency suppress System 2, because System 2 is
                slow and resource-heavy, the brain relies on the “fast”
                System 1 to resolve the stress quickly by simply complying
              ➢ loss risk: the threat of “losing the deal” triggers a fear of

                loss, and System 1 is evolutionarily wired to prioritize
                avoiding a loss over gaining a reward, making the
                employee act impulsively to prevent the negative outcome


Cybersecurity and National Defence (Grandi Sfide - Digital)
                                                                                22
A.Y. 2025 - 2026
   Social Engineering - Target
    ➢ each of us can be the chosen victim​
    ➢ primary target is typically help desk, secretarial, or support staff​




Cybersecurity and National Defence (Grandi Sfide - Digital)
                                                                              23
A.Y. 2025 - 2026
   “Hacking” People
    ➢ the social engineer hacks people because, very often, hacking a
      human being is easier than hacking a computer system
    ➢ why spending time looking for vulnerabilities in a system when
      you can fraudulently get its password?




Cybersecurity and National Defence (Grandi Sfide - Digital)
                                                                    24
A.Y. 2025 - 2026
