

--- PAGE 1 ---
STM Exercise 5
Phase Diagrams
(full solubility in the solid state)
(no solubility in the solid state)


--- PAGE 2 ---
Determination of the compositions of phases in equilibrium in a 
biphasic zone: 
HORIZONTAL RULE
L
L+S
S
Liquid 
composition
Solid 
composition
➢Draw the tie line    - - - - - -
➢Individuate intersections with liquidus (•) and 
solidus ( ) lines
➢ The composition of the liquid is the value on the 
x axix correspondent to the intersection between the 
tie line and the liquidus line. 
➢ The composition of the solid is the value on the x 
axis correspondent to the intersection of the tie line 
with the solidus line. 
LIQUIDUS CURVE = above it only liquid is present
SOLIDUS CURVE = below it only solid is present


--- PAGE 3 ---
Phases relative amounts determination in a biphasic zone, at equilibrium:
LEVER RULE
L
L+S
S
c de
➢Draw the tie line - - - - - -
➢Individuate the intersection between tie line 
and liquidus line (• c) and solidus line (   d)
➢The % of phases in a point of the biphasic 
region (e) is defined as:
%L = (ed/cd)*100
%S = (ce/cd)*100


--- PAGE 4 ---
The lever rule
If an alloy consists of more than one phase, the amount of each phase present can be found by applying the lever rule to the 
phase diagram.
The lever rule can be explained by considering a simple balance. 
The composition of the alloy is represented by the fulcrum C, and the compositions of the two phases by the ends of a bar (C1 
and C2).
Each phase are determined by the weights needed to balance the system.
Fraction of phase 1 = (C2 - C) / (C2 - C1)
Fraction of phase 2 = (C - C1) / (C2 - C1).


--- PAGE 5 ---
Exercise 1: Draw a phase diagram (for generic components A and B), with complete solubility in the 
liquid state and complete solubility in the solid state. Also indicate the phase/phases present(s) in 
each region of the phase diagram


--- PAGE 6 ---
Exercise 2: determine the phases present, their composition and relative amounts in the point A, B 
and C indicated in the phase diagram. Schematize the microstructure in each point.
C


--- PAGE 7 ---
Exercise 3: determine the phase present, their composition and relative amounts in the point D, E 
and F indicated in the phase diagram. Schematize the microstructure in each point.
D
E
F


--- PAGE 8 ---



--- PAGE 9 ---



--- PAGE 10 ---
Exercise 4: determine the phase present, their composition and relative amounts in the point A, B 
and C indicated in the phase diagram. 
A
C
B


--- PAGE 11 ---
Exercise 5: Draw a phase diagram (for generic components A and B), with complete solubility in 
the liquid state and no solubility in the solid state. Also indicate the phase/phases present(s) in 
each region of the phase diagram


--- PAGE 12 ---
Exercise 6: determine the phases present, their compositions and relative amounts in the point X.
X


--- PAGE 13 ---
Exercise 7: determine the phases present, their compositions and relative amounts in the point X.
X